## Files generated by a Physcraper run

Within the output directory defined by the user, a Physcraper run generates various subdirectories which are labeled with a TAG name that corresponds to the file name of the input alignment.

The subdirectories consist of:


### - Input files

Within the `inputs_TAG` directory, Physcraper writes tree and alignment files used in a Physcraper run for the sake of reproducibility, taxon name matching, and taxon reconciliation.
It also writes the ".config" file down if none was provided, as well as the results of the mapping of the tree taxon labels, saved as "otu_info.csv"

### - Run files

Within the `run_TAG` directory, all run files are also automatically written down: Blast runs, alignments, RAxML trees, bootstrap results, etc.

Intermediate processing files, and the json formatted otu information are also stored here. Many fo these files are re-used in the event that the analysis crashes and is restarted. Make sure you use a new output directory or otherwise empty this folder if you want to modify the initial run parameters.

The trees are reconstructed using RAxML, with tip labels corresponding to local ids (e.g., otu42009, otuPS1) and not taxon names (e.g., *Ceiba*), nor taxonomic ids (e.g., ott or ncbi). Branch lengths are proportional to relative substitution rates.

### - BLAST files

The `blast_TAG` folder contains XML files with BLAST results for each sequence in the input alignment.

### - Output files

In the `output_TAG` folder, the updated tree with taxon names as tip labels is saved as "updated_taxonname.tre".
A version of the updated tree in nexson format containing several types of tip labels is also saved here. From the nexson tree, a tree with any
label can be produced.
See section [relabeling the trees](#id1) below for more info on how to generate trees with different types of labels.

The "seqlen_mismatch.txt" file contains the acession numbers, taxa, and sequence lengths of BLAST matches that didn't meet the sequence length cutoffs.

Finally, the CSV file "otu_info_TAG.csv" contains a summary of information about original and newly added sequences.
