
The easiest way to run Physcraper is using the command line tools. This way, you can directly specify arguments.
A configuration file will be written down for the sake of reproducibility.

## Example Physcraper runs from the command line

### Starting with only an OpenTree study and tree id

As input, you will minimally need a study and tree ids from a tree uploaded to the OpenTree website (https://tree.opentreeoflife.org/curator). The `--treebase` flag (or `-tb`) will automatically download an alignment for that tree from TreeBASE.


    physcraper_run.py [-s OPENTREE_STUDY_ID] [-t OPENTREE_TREE_ID] [-tb] [-o OUTPUT]


e.g.,


    physcraper_run.py -s pg_55 -t tree5864 -tb -o pg_55_web


The output files generated by this example run are stored in "docs/examples/pg_55_web"

### Starting with an OpenTree study and tree id and an alignment

Alternatively, you can provide the gene alignment that you want to update using the `-a` command:


    physcraper_run.py [-s OPENTREE_STUDY_ID] [-t OPENTREE_TREE_ID] [-o OUTPUT] [-a ALIGNMENT] [-as ALIGNMENT_SCHEMA]



For example, to update a tree from [Crous et al. 2012](https://tree.opentreeoflife.org/curator/study/view/ot_350/?tab=home&tree=Tr53296) using an alignment already downloaded from TreeBASE, you can do:


    physcraper_run.py -s ot_350 -t Tr53297 -a docs/examples/inputdata/ot_350Tr53297.aln -as "nexus" -o ot_350


### Starting with your own tree

If the tree you want to update is not posted to the OpenTree website, you need to match
the labels on your tree to taxa using the [OpenTree Bulk Taxonomic Name Resolution Service](https://tree.opentreeoflife.org/curator/tnrs/). Download your matched names, unzip the folder, and pass the "json" file that is output from the OpenTree Bulk TNRS tool as `--taxon_info` or `-ti` argument:


    physcraper_run.py [-tf TREE_FILE] [-tfs TREEFILE_SCHEMA] [-a ALIGNMENT] [-as ALIGNMENT_SCHEMA] [-ti TAXON_INFO_JSONFILE]  [-o OUTPUT]


e.g.,


    physcraper_run.py -tf tests/data/tiny_test_example/test.tre -tfs newick -a tests/data/tiny_test_example/test.fas  -as fasta --taxon_info tests/data/tiny_test_example/main.json -o owndata


### Checking the inputs before a full run

Use the flag `-no_est` to simply download a tree from OpenTree and the corresponding alignment from TreeBASE.
This will not run the BLAST and tree estimation steps:

    physcraper_run.py -s pg_55 -t tree5864 -tb -no_est -o pg55_C


To initiate a full Physcraper run from that tree and alignment, simply remove the `-no_est` flag.
It will re-load the inputs from the specified output directory and will use your same config settings that are automatically written out to "OUTPUT_run.config".

The `-re` flag will re-run a Physcraper cycle on a given output directory.
If the initial or previous run completed, it will use the final output tree and alignment as input.
If the run was not completed, it will reload the original input files.


    physcraper_run.py -re pg_55_C -o pg_55_C


You can also re-run with a different configuration file:

    physcraper_run.py -re  pg_55_C/ -c alt_config -o  pg_55_D



## Configuration parameters


To see all the configuration parameters, use `physcraper_run.py -h`.

The configuration parameters may be set in a configuration file, and then passed into the analysis run. See file "example.config" for an example.

  -c CONFIGFILE, --configfile CONFIGFILE
                        Gives the path to the configuration file

If a config file input is combined with command line configuration parameters, the command line values will override those in the configuration file.

The configuration settings for the current run are written to standard out, and saved in the
output directory as "run.config", e.g.,

    [blast]
    Entrez.email = None
    e_value_thresh = 1e-05
    hitlist_size = 20
    location = local
    localblastdb = /home/projects/ncbi/localblastdb/
    url_base = None
    num_threads = 8
    delay = 90
    [physcraper]
    spp_threshold = 3
    seq_len_perc = 0.8
    trim_perc = 0.8
    min_len = 0.8
    max_len = 1.2
    taxonomy_path = /home/projects/physcraper/taxonomy


### Input Data


Tree information (required)

  -s STUDY_ID, --study_id STUDY_ID
                        OpenTree study id
  -t TREE_ID, --tree_id TREE_ID
                        OpenTree tree id

OR

  -tf TREE_FILE, --tree_file TREE_FILE
                        A path to a tree file
  -tfs TREE_SCHEMA, --tree_schema TREE_SCHEMA
                        Tree file format schema
  -ti TAXON_INFO, --taxon_info TAXON_INFO
                        Taxon info file from OpenTree TNRS



Alignment information (required)

  -a ALIGNMENT, --alignment ALIGNMENT
                        Gives the path to alignment file
  -as ALN_SCHEMA, --aln_schema ALN_SCHEMA
                        Specifies the alignment schema, one of nexus or fasta

OR

  -tb, --treebase       Downloads alignment from TreeBASE

Tree and alignment information are required.
After an analysis has been run, they can be reloaded from a directory from a previous run.

  -re RELOAD_FILES, --reload_files RELOAD_FILES
                        Reloads files and configuration from the output directory specified in -o


REQUIRED:

  -o OUTPUT, --output OUTPUT
                        Specifies the path to output directory

Optional:

  -st SEARCH_TAXON, --search_taxon SEARCH_TAXON
                        Specifies the taxonomic id to constrain the BLAST search. Format ott:123
                        or ncbi:123. By default it will use the ingroup of the tree from
                        OpenTree, or the MRCA of all tips if the former is not specified.




### Blast search parameters

  -e EMAIL, --email EMAIL
                        Specifies the email address for BLAST searches

  -r, --repeat          To repeat a BLAST search until no more sequences are found


  -ev EVAL, --eval EVAL
                        Specifies the blast e-value cutoff
  -hl HITLIST_LEN, --hitlist_len HITLIST_LEN
                        Specifies the number of BLAST searches to save per taxon


You can use a local BLAST database.
To setup see [Local Databases section](https://physcraper.readthedocs.io/en/cleanup/install.html#local-databases) of this documentation.

  -db BLAST_DB, --blast_db BLAST_DB
                        Specifies the local download of BLAST database




  -nt NUM_THREADS, --num_threads NUM_THREADS
                        Specifies the number of threads to use in processing


You can use your own BLAST database, for example set up on an AWS server.


### Sequence filtering parameters

  -tp TRIM_PERC, --trim_perc TRIM_PERC
                        minimum percentage of seqs end of alignemnts
  -rlmax RELATIVE_LENGTH_MAX, --relative_length_max RELATIVE_LENGTH_MAX
                        max relative length of added seqs, compared to input
                        aln len (blast matches not within lenegth cutoffs stored in outputs/seqlen_mismatch.txt)
  -rlmin RELATIVE_LENGTH_MIN, --relative_length_min RELATIVE_LENGTH_MIN
                        min relative length of added seqs, compared to input
                        aln len
                        (blast matches not within lenegth cutoffs stored in outputs/seqlen_mismatch.txt)
  -spn SPECIES_NUMBER, --species_number SPECIES_NUMBER
                        max number of seqs to include per species

  -de DELAY, --delay DELAY
                        how long to wait before blasting the same sequence
                        again

### Tree search parameters
  -no_est, --no_estimate_tree
                        don't estimate tree (default is False)

  -bs BOOTSTRAP_REPS, --bootstrap_reps BOOTSTRAP_REPS
                        number of bootstrap reps


### Internal arguments


  -tx TAXONOMY, --taxonomy TAXONOMY
                        path to taxonomy
